# Generate JSON Schema of AIoD Metadata Model

This folder contains scripts to generate JSON schemas for implemented models, and compare it with the AIoD conceptual model.

1. [Process for Updating the Schema](#process-for-updating-the-schema)
2. [Folder Structure](#folder-structure)
3. [Usage](#usage)
4. [Code Structure](#code-structure)
   - [generate_schema.ipynb](#generate_schemaipynb)
   - [generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb](#generate_schema_no_inheritanceipynb)
5. [Comparison Results](#comparison-results)
   - [CSV Files in comparison_results](#csv-files-in-comparison_results)
   - [CSV Files in comparison_results_no_inheritance](#csv-files-in-comparison_results_no_inheritance)
6. [TODO](#todo)
7. [Note](#note)


## Process for Updating the Schema

The following steps outline the process we follow for updating the schema:

1. **Add Missing Properties to Existing Entities**: Identify and add any properties that are present in the AIoD conceptual model but missing in the existing entities.
2. **Correct Incorrect Property Types/Names/Range**: Ensure that the property types, names, and ranges in the existing entities match those defined in the AIoD conceptual model.
- *We are currently at stage 1 and 2.*
3. **Delete Extra Properties from Existing Entities**: Remove any properties that are present in the existing entities but not in the AIoD conceptual model.
4. **Add Missing Entities**: Identify and add any entities that are present in the AIoD conceptual model but missing in the existing schema.
5. **Use Newly Added Entities as Missing Properties of Existing Entities**: Ensure that all properties defined in the AIoD conceptual model for the newly added entities are included.
6. **Delete Extra Entities**: Remove any entities that are present in the existing schema but not in the AIoD conceptual model.

This process ensures that the implemented schema remains consistent with the AIoD conceptual model and up-to-date with any changes.


## Folder Structure

- `generate_schema.ipynb`: Script to generate JSON schema, with addition to all fields from all directly/indirectly inherited parent classes.
- `generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb`: Script to generate JSON schemas, with only fields from directly inherited parent classes. This is used to simplify the comparison results by only showing missing fields in the parent class and not propagating them to all child classes. This simplifies the comparison.
- `conceptual_model/`: Contains taxonomies and JSON schema of the conceptual model.
- `comparison_results/`: Contains results generated by `generate_schema.ipynb`.
- `comparison_results_noinheritance/`: Contains results generated by `generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb`.
- `analysis.ipynb`: Example script for analysis of the generated comparision results.

## Usage

Example usage given in `analysis.ipynb`

1. Before generating comparison results, make sure this branch is updated with the changes in the develop branch.
2. Open the `generate_schema.ipynb` or `generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb` notebook in Jupyter.
3. Run the cells sequentially to generate the JSON schemas.
4. The generated results will be saved in the `comparison_results/` or `comparison_results_noinheritance/` directory, respectively.
5. Use the comparison results to document what needs to be changed in the AIoD REST API in this [excel-sheet](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/15qDupz9-YxEY2jeFQxLQNL8uhy4CICKUxYMCsXWvZJ8/edit?usp=sharing).


## Code Structure

### `generate_schema.ipynb`

- **Import Libraries**: Import necessary libraries and modules.
- **Load AIoD Conceptual Model**: Load the AIoD Conceptual model.
- **Generate JSON Schema**: Generate JSON schemas for the data models.
  - **Identify Properties**: Identify properties of all parent classes the child entity is inheriting directly/indirectly.
  - **Add Properties to Schema**: Add inherited properties to the `properties` key. Note: At this stage we do not differentiate between `direct_properties` and `inherited_properties`.
- **Preprocess the generated schema**: The generated schema is preprocessed to closely match the structure of the conceptual model. As well as `ORM`, `Base`, `Type` classes are merged with their base classes (This is because they are implementational classes and do not exist in the conceptual model).
- **Generate comparison results**: Identifies missing and extra properties and entities.
- **Save Schema**: Save the generated JSON schemas to the appropriate directory.

### `generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb`

- Same code structure as `generate_schema.ipynb`, only excludes adding inherited properties to schema.


## Comparison Results

The comparison results are stored in the `comparison_results/` and `comparison_results_noinheritance/` directories.

### CSV Files in `comparison_results/`

The `comparison_results/` folder contains four different CSV files that provide detailed comparison results:

1. **`missing_properties.csv`**: Lists the fields for each entity that are present in the AIoD conceptual model but missing in the generated JSON schemas.
2. **`extra_properties.csv`**: Lists the fields for each entity that are present in the generated JSON schemas but not in the AIoD conceptual model.
3. **`missing_entities.csv`**: Lists the entities that are present in the AIoD conceptual model but missing in the generated JSON schemas.
4. **`extra_entities.csv`**: Lists the entities that are present in the generated JSON schemas but not in the AIoD conceptual model.

### CSV Files in `comparison_results_no_inheritance/`

- Same file sequence/structure as `comparison_results`.

### TODO

1. Modify the script to generate JSON schemas with the following structure:
   - `inherited_properties`: Contains all fields from all directly/indirectly inherited parent classes.
   - `direct_properties`: Contains only fields from the current class.

2. Update the `generate_schema.ipynb` and `generate_schema_no_inheritance.ipynb` scripts:
   - Identify and separate inherited properties from direct properties.
   - Add inherited properties to the `inherited_properties` key.
   - Add direct properties to the `direct_properties` key.

3. Note: The built-in `json_schema` method currently generates fields with direct inheritance. We need to modify this to separate inherited properties into the `inherited_properties` key and direct properties into the `direct_properties` key.

4. Note: After renaming of classes in the API, we will need to update the preprocessing step.

5. Update the documentation to reflect the changes in the JSON schema structure.

### Note:
* The conceptual model is a work in progress.
* The code is meant for internal usage to keep the implemented schema up-to-date with the conceptual model.
